DPP Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
 
 1 
1) ACCOUNTABILITY: 
Number DPP/SICU/20/0001 Version 1.0 
Title Admission and Discharge Guidelines for Adult ICU. 
Distribution Date 15th August 2020 
Effective Date 15th August 2020 
Revision Dates Last 15th August 2020 Target 15th August 2023 
Process Owner Chief of Medical Services (COMS) 
Signatory Authority Chief Executive Officer for Governmental Hospitals (CEO) 
Location Health Policy Network (HPN) 
Applicable Functions All Department at Salmanyia Medical Complex (SMC) 
 
2) KEY WORDS: ICU, Admission, Discharge. 
 
3) STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:  To establish admission and discharge criteria for the 
adult patients requiring ICU care, To guide decisions regarding appropriate use of 
ICU services in the context of contacting health care expenditures and proper 
management of patient flow effectively and efficiently at SMC 
 
4) SCOPE: All physicians at SMC dealing with critically ill patients requiring referral to 
ICU to provide the most effective and efficient operations of this guideline. 
 
5) RELATED REFERENCES: 
 
 Nates JL1, Nunnally M, Kleinpell R, Blosser S, Goldner J, Birriel B, Fowler 
CS, Byrum D, Miles WS, Bailey H, Sprung CL; ICU Admission, Discharge, and 
Triage Guidelines: A Framework to Enhance Clinical Operations, Development 
of Institutional Policies, and Further Research; Crit Care Med. 2016 
Aug;44(8):1553-602. 
 Guidelines for intensive care unit admission, discharge, and triage. Task Force of 
the American College of Critical Care Medicine, Society of Critical Care 
Medicine; Crit Care Med. 1999 Mar;27(3):633-8 
 Joint Commission: Hospital Accreditation Standards 2012. In: Standards, 
Elements of Performance, Scoring, Accreditation Policies 2012. Joint 
Commission Resources; 1st edition (December 5, 2011) 
 Cohen RI, Eichorn A, Silver A: Admission decisions to a medical intensive care 
unit are based on functional status rather than severity of illness. A single center 
experience. Minerva Anestesiol 2012; 78:1226–1233 
 
6) DEFENITION: Not Applicable. 
 
7) POLICY: All physicians at SMC dealing with critically ill patients requiring referral 
to ICU should comply with the Admission and Discharge Guidelines for Adult ICU. 
 
DPP
 Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
8) RESPONSIBILTIES: 
i. 
Signatory Authority (CEO): To authorize and sign off the DPP. 
ii. 
Process Owner (COMS): To maintain the DPP, to direct staff and to set policy. 
iii. Chairperson of the Department: To monitor and to supervise DPP. 
iv. Head of the Unit: To develop, review, monitor, and   evaluate DPP. 
v. All Medical Department Physicians: To implement the DPP. 
9) PROCEDURES FOR IMPLEMENTIONS: 
9.1 Admission Policy  
9.1.1. Accepted age for adult ICU admits patients is from 14 years old and above. 
9.1.2. All Admissions arranged by consultation with ICU on-call consultant or their 
nominated deputies via direct telephone call to ICU (7901/7902) Consultations 
are accepted 24h a day. 
9.1.3.  It is the responsibility of the ICU consultant or their nominated deputies to decide 
if a patient meets eligibility requirements for ICU. In case of conflict regarding 
admission or discharge criteria, the ICU consultant will decide which patient 
should be given priority. 
9.1.4.  Patients admitted directly from the Accident and Emergency department or by 
transfer from another hospital will always be recorded as under the care of the 
primary specialty on call e.g. medical or surgical team or other special unit (e.g. 
Surgical, medical, Orthopedics, O&G) as appropriate. 
9.1.5.  Resuscitation or admission must not be delayed where the presenting condition is 
imminently life-threatening, (eg profound shock or hypoxia), unless clear 
advanced directives are available. 
9.1.6. Until the patient enters the ICU his/her medical care remains the responsibility of 
the referring physician. 
9.2 Admission Criteria 
Our criteria have been adapted from society of critical care medicine 2016. 
9.2.1. ICU provides services that include both intensive monitoring and intensive 
treatment for patients with actual or potential vital system failures, which appear 
reversible with the provision of ICU support. During times of high utilization and 
scarce beds, patients requiring intensive treatment (Priority 1) have priority over 
monitoring (Priority 2) and terminally or critically ill patients with a poor 
prognosis for recovery (Priority 3and 4 )(see below ). To optimize resource use 
while improving outcomes, the eligibility for ICU admission and discharge is 
also based upon reversibility of the clinical problem as well as the likely benefits 
of ICU treatment and expectation of recovery. 
9.2.2. Generally speaking, we can identify two conditions in which ICU care will not be 
of greater benefit than conventional care. These include patients who are at the 
two extremes of the risk of death spectrum; relatively low risk of death and 
exceedingly high risk of death. These groups can be referred to as "too well to 
benefit" and "too sick to benefit" from critical care services.  
2 
DPP
 Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
9.2.3. The ICU admission decision should be based on prioritization models while 
keeping on consideration the specific diagnosis and the objective parameters 
models. All these models have limitations, and none have been properly validated. 
Accordingly, these models can be used as a guideline only and combing these 
three models together can help in prioritizing the eligibility for ICU admission. 
I. Prioritization model 
This system defines those that will benefit most from the ICU (Priority 1) to those that 
will not benefit at all (priority 4) from ICU admission. 
A. Priority 1 Patients: 
Critically ill, unstable patients in need of intensive treatment such as ventilatory support 
or continuous vasoactive drug infusion. Examples of such admissions may include, but 
are not limited to status asthmaticus patients, post-operative or acute respiratory failure 
patients requiring mechanical ventilatory support and shock or hemodynamically 
unstable patients receiving invasive monitoring and/or vasoactive drugs. 
B. Priority 2 Patients: 
Patients who, at the time of admission, may not be critically ill but whose condition 
requires the technologic monitoring services of the ICU. These patients would benefit 
from intensive monitoring (e.g. peripheral or pulmonary arterial lines) and are at risk for 
needing immediate intensive treatment. Examples of such admissions may include, but 
are not limited to, patients with underlying respiratory, lung, or renal disease who have a 
severe medical illness or have undergone major surgery. 
C. Priority 3:  
These unstable patients are critically ill but have a reduced likelihood of recover because 
of underlying disease, nature of their acute illness and low chance of reversibility. 
Priority 3 patients may receive intensive treatment to relieve acute illness but limits on 
therapeutic efforts may be set such as no intubation or cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
Examples include patients with metastatic malignancy complicated by infection, or 
airway obstruction. In cases of metastatic cancer with no additional chemotherapy or 
radiation therapy options, palliative care should be initially offered 
D. Priority 4: 
These are patients who are generally not appropriate for ICU admission (unless they are 
potential organ donors). These include terminal or moribund patients with no possibility 
of recovery. Admission of these patients should be on an individual basis, under unusual 
circumstances and at the discretion of the ICU chairperson. These patients can be placed 
in the following categories: 
a. Little or no anticipated benefit from ICU care based on low risk of active 
intervention that could not safely be administered in a non-ICU setting (too well to 
benefit from ICU care). Examples include patients with peripheral vascular 
surgery, hemodynamically stable diabetic ketoacidosis, conscious drug overdose, 
etc. 
3 
DPP
 Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
b. Patients with terminal and irreversible illness facing imminent death (too sick to 
benefit from ICU care). For example: severe irreversible brain damage, irreversible 
multi-organ system failure, metastatic cancer unresponsive to chemotherapy and/or 
radiation therapy (unless the patient is on a specific treatment protocol), patients 
with decision-making capacity who decline intensive care and/or invasive 
monitoring and who receive comfort care only, brain dead non-organ donors, 
patients in a persistent vegetative state, patients who are permanently unconscious, 
etc. 
II.  Diagnosis Model 
This model uses specific conditions or diseases to determine appropriateness of ICU 
admission. 
E. Pulmonary System 
1. Acute respiratory failure requiring ventilatory support. 
2. Pulmonary emboli with hemodynamic instability. 
3.  Patients in a medical ward who are demonstrating respiratory deterioration. 
4.  Need for nursing/respiratory care not available in lesser care areas such as 
floor or intermediate care unit. 
5. Massive hemoptysis. 
6. Respiratory failure with imminent intubation. 
B. Neurologic Disorders 
1.  Acute stroke with altered mental status. 
2.  Coma: metabolic, toxic, or anoxic. 
3.  Intracranial hemorrhage with potential for herniation. 
4. Acute subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
5. Meningitis with altered mental status or respiratory compromise. 
6. Central nervous system or neuromuscular disorders with deteriorating 
neurologic or pulmonary function. 
7. Status epilepticus. 
8. Brain dead or potentially brain dead patients who are being aggressively 
managed while determining organ donation status. 
9.  Vasospasm. 
10. Severe head injured patients 
C. Drug Ingestion and Drug Overdose 
1.  Hemodynamically unstable drug ingestion. 
2.  Drug ingestion with significantly altered mental status with inadequate airway 
protection. 
3. Seizures following drug ingestion 
D. Gastrointestinal Disorders 
1. Life threatening gastrointestinal bleeding including hypotension, angina, 
continued bleeding, or with comorbid conditions. 
2. Fulminant hepatic failure. 
4 
DPP
 Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
3. Severe pancreatitis. 
4. Esophageal perforation with or without mediastinitis. 
E. Endocrine 
1. Diabetic ketoacidosis complicated by hemodynamic instability, altered mental 
status, respiratory insufficiency, or severe acidosis. 
2. Thyroid storm or myxedema coma with hemodynamic instability. 
3. Hyperosmolar state with coma and/or hemodynamic instability. 
4. Other endocrine problems such as adrenal crises with hemodynamic instability. 
5. Severe hypercalcemia with altered mental status, requiring hemodynamic 
monitoring. 
6. Hypo or hypernatremia with seizures, altered mental status. 
7.  Hypo or hypermagnesemia with hemodynamic compromise or dysrhythmias. 
8. Hypo or hyperkalemia with dysrhythmias or muscular weakness. 
9. Hypophosphatemia with muscular weakness 
F. Surgical 
1.  Post-operative patients requiring hemodynamic monitoring/ventilatory support 
or extensive nursing care. 
G. Miscellaneous 
1. Septic shock with hemodynamic instability.  
2. Hemodynamic monitoring. 
3. Clinical conditions requiring ICU level nursing care. 
4. Environmental injuries (lightning, near drowning, hypo/hyperthermia) 
5. New/experimental therapies with potential for complications. 
III. Objective Parameters Model 
A. Vital Signs 
1. Pulse < 40 or > 150 beats/minute. 
2. Systolic arterial pressure < 80 mm Hg or 20 mm Hg below the patient's usual 
pressure. 
3. Mean arterial pressure < 60 mm Hg. 
4. Diastolic arterial pressure > 120 mm Hg. 
5. Respiratory rate > 35 breaths/minute 
B. Laboratory Values (newly discovered) 
1. Serum sodium < 110 mEq/L or > 170 mEq/L. 
2. Serum potassium < 2.0 mEq/L or > 7.0 mEq/L. 
3. PaO2 < 50 mm Hg. 
4. PH < 7.1 or > 7.7. 
5. Serum glucose > 800 mg/dl. 
6. Serum calcium > 15 mg/dl 
7. Toxic level of drug or other chemical substance in a hemodynamically or 
neurologically compromised patient. 
5 
DPP
 Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
C. Radiography/Ultrasonography/Tomography (newly discovered) 
1. Cerebral vascular hemorrhage, contusion or subarachnoid hemorrhage with 
altered mental status or focal neurological signs. 
2. Ruptured viscera, bladder, liver, esophageal varices or uterus with hemodynamic 
instability. 
3. Dissecting aortic aneurysm 
D. Physical Findings (acute onset) 
4. Unequal pupils in an unconscious patient. 
5. Airway obstruction. 
6. Coma. 
7. Continuous seizures. 
8. Cyanosis. 
9.3  ICU Discharge   
9.3.1. All discharges must be approved by the on call ICU consultant. 
9.3.2. Patients are discharged when the reason for admission has resolved, it is 
appropriate to discharge a patient from the ICU to a lower acuity area when a 
patient’s physiologic status has stabilized and there no longer is a need for ICU 
monitoring and treatment. 
9.3.3. In order to improve resource utilization, discharge from the ICU is appropriate 
despite a deteriorated patient’s physiological status if active interventions are no 
longer planned. 
9.3.4. A discharge summary with plan of management must be completed and attached 
to patient medical record. 
9.3.5. If a patient expired then a discharge entry in I-Seha system is required with status 
“Deceased”, with proper discharge summary. 
9.3.6. It is recommended to avoid discharge from ICU during night shift (after 10 pm). 
10) TRAINING: All All physicians at SMC dealing with critically ill patients at SMC 
Hospital must be trained to the level stated in their Job Description provided by the 
Civil Services Bureau as per their designated position provided with the associated 
Organizational Chart. Staff will undergo additional training as changes in services or 
technology dictate. Specific training requirements will be documented in the specific 
work area policy. 
11) ACCESSIBILITY, DISSEMINATION, REVIEW, and REVISION & 
AUTHORIZATION: Please refer to sections 11, 12, 13 & 14 in 
MAP/MADM/03/0002: Ministry Administrative Policies (MAPs). 
6 