DPP Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
 
 1 
1) ACCOUNTABILITY 
Number DPPSNGN090008 Version  4.0 
Title Denture Care 
Distribution Date 20th July 2009 
Effective Date 20th July 2009 
Revision Dates Last 2020 November   th 29  Target 2023 November   th 29 
Process Owner Chief of Nursing Services (CNS) 
Signatory Authority Chief Excusive Officer of Governmental Hospitals (CEO) 
Location Health Policy Network (HPN) 
Applicable Functions Nursing Services at Salmaniya Medical Complex (SMC), 
Peripheral Hospitals 
 
2) KEYWORDS  Denture Care-Procedure. 
 
3) STATEMENT OF PURPOSE To familiarize All Registered Nurses (RNs) Trained 
Practical Nurses (TPNs) at MOH Hospitals with the process of proper handling, care, 
cleanliness and replacement of patient’s dentures to prevent irritation, and infection of 
mouth. 
 
4) SCOPE All RNs TPNs at MOH Hospitals to provide the most effective and efficient 
operation of the policy.  
 
5) RELATED REFERENCES 
 Treas, Leslie S, 2014. Basic Nursing Concepts, Skills, & Reasoning. 1st ed. 
USA Houck. 
 Perry, Anne, 2017. Clinical Nursing Skills and Techniques. 9th ed. Canada 
Elsevier. 
 
6) DEFINITIONS  
 Dentures prosthetic devices constructed to replace missing teeth, and which 
supported by surrounding soft and hard tissues of the oral cavity. Conventional 
dentures are removable; however, there are many different denture designs, some 
which rely on bonding or clipping onto teeth or dental implants. 
 
7) POLICY All RNs TPNs at MOH Hospitals should comply with Denture Care policy 
process and procedures. 
 
8) RESPONSIBILITIES 
i. Signatory Authority (CEO) To sign and authorize the DPP. 
ii. Process Owner (CNS) To maintain the DPP, to direct staff and to set policy. 
iii. Deputy Chief of Nursing Services (DCNS) To maintain the DPP. 
iv. Head Nurse To develop, review, monitor, and evaluate DPP. 
v. Nursing Supervisor To follow up the implementation of the DPP.  
vi. All RNs TPNs To implement the DPP.  
 
 
DPP
 Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
9) PROCEDURE FOR IMPLEMENTATION  
9.1.  Practice proper hand hygiene. 
9.2. Assemble requirements 
a. 
Tray containing 
 Tooth brush  denture brush. 
 Oral care set (if needed). 
 Hospital approved mouthwash.  
 Labeled denture cup. 
 Disposable gloves.  
 Gauze 4 × 4.  
 Kidney dish. 
 Bowl. 
9.3. Identify patient and explain procedure.  
9.4. Provide privacy. 
9.5. Ask patient to remove dentures and place in kidney dish , if unable , remove as 
follows  
9.5.1. Remove upper plate by grasping the front with thumb and index finger 
moving up and down using gauze, take out gently, and then place in 
kidney dish. 
9.5.2. Remove lower plate by rotating one side downward, take out gently and 
place in kidney dish. 
9.6. Take tray to preparation room. 
9.7. Don gloves. 
9.8. Place bowl filled with warm water in sink. 
9.9. Apply dentifrice to brush and clean all surfaces of one denture plate at a time. 
(See figure 1). 
9.10. Refill bowl with warm tap water and rinse dentures thoroughly. 
9. 11. Place dentures in labeled denture cup with water  solution. 
9. 12. Store dentures in a close labeled cup during socking or when dentures not being 
worn.  
9. 13. Remove gloves. 
9. 14. Take denture cup to bedside. 
9. 15. When a denture is not in use, place it in a marked clean container filled with 
clean water. 
9. 16. Assist patient for oral care if needed. 
9. 17. Assist patient in re – inserting dentures if necessary. 
9. 18. Instruct the patient to avoid rapping in facial or toilet tissues or placing them on     
meal tray.  
9. 19. Practice proper hand hygiene. 
9.20. Record procedure in nurse's records. 
2
DPP
 Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
(Figure 1)  
10) TRAINING All RNs TPNs at MOH Hospital must be trained to the level stated in 
their Job Description provided by the Civil Services Bureau as per their designated 
position provided with the associated Organizational Chart. Nursing personnel will 
undergo additional training as changes in services or technology dictate. Specific 
training requirements will be documented in the specific work area policy. 
11) ACCESSIBILITY, 
DISSEMINATION, REVIEW, and REVISION & 
AUTHORIZATION Please refer to sections 11, 12, 13 & 14 in 
MAPMADM030002 Ministry Administrative Policies (MAPs).  
3