 
 
 1 
DPP Ministry of Health – Departmental Policy and Processes 
 
1) ACCOUNTABILITY: 
Number DPP/SNGN/09/0011 Version  4.0 
Title Foot Care 
Distribution Date 20th July 2009 
Effective Date 20th July 2009 
Revision Dates Last  29th November 2020 Target 29th November 2023 
Process Owner Chief of Nursing Services (CNS) 
Signatory Authority Chief Excusive Officer of Governmental Hospitals (CEO) 
Location Health Policy Network (HPN) 
Applicable Functions Nursing Services at Salmaniya Medical Complex (SMC), 
Peripheral Hospitals 
 
2) KEYWORDS: Foot Care. 
 
3) STATEMENT OF PURPOSE: To familiarize all Nursing Personnel at MOH Hospital 
with the process of foot care to promote cleanliness, prevents infection, stimulates 
peripheral circulation and controls odor. 
 
4) SCOPE:  All Nursing Personnel at MOH Hospital to provide the most effective and 
efficient operation of the policy. 
 
5) RELATED REFERENCES: 
 Fundamentals of Nursing concepts process and practice, Kozier, Erbm 10th ed. 
Berman Snyder 2016. 
 Sorrentino, Sheila, 2019. Mosby's Essentials for Nursing Assistants. 6th ed. 
Elsevier: Canada. 
6) DEFINITIONS: 
 The basic care of the lower leg, foot, and nails, including mobility and health 
assessment, and interventions of trimming nails; buffing corns, calluses; debriding 
thickened nails; and patient teaching. 
7) POLICY: All Nursing Personnel at MOH Hospital should comply with the Foot Care 
policy process and procedures. 
 
8) RESPONSIBILITIES: 
i. Signatory Authority (CEO): To sign and authorize the DPP. 
ii. Process Owner (CNS): To maintain the DPP, to direct staff and to set policy. 
iii. Deputy Chief of Nursing Services (DCNS): To maintain the DPP. 
iv. Head Nurse: To develop, review, monitor, and evaluate DPP. 
v. Nursing Supervisor: To follow up the implementation of the DPP.  
vi. All Nursing Personnel: To implement the DPP.  
9) PROCEDURE FOR IMPLEMENTATION:  
9.1. Observe the color, shape and texture of the toenails. 
9.2. Watch for redness, drying, cracking, blister, discoloration, ingrown nails or 
other signs of traumatic injury. 
9.3. Practice proper hand hygiene. 
9.4. Assemble requirements: 
a. 
Bath trolley containing: 
 Basin. 
 Jug of warm water. 
 Bucket. 
 Towel. 
 Soap/soap dish. 
 Wash cloth. 
 Lotion/oil. 
 Under pad. 
 Gloves if needed. 
9.5. Explain procedure and purpose to patient. 
9.6. Provide privacy. 
9.7. Assist patient to a sitting position on a chair or to a supine/semi fowler's 
position in bed with a pillow under the knees. 
9.8. Place under pad under patient’s feet on bed. 
9.9. Place a stool at patient’s feet while sitting on a chair and keep basin of warm 
water over it. 
9.10. Fill basin with water, check temperature with inner surface of wrist and place at 
patient’s feet. 
9.11. Assist patient to place one foot in basin and allow soaking for at least 10mts. 
9.12. Clean foot with soap using washcloth and rub callused area then rinse it. 
9.13. Assist patient to remove foot from basin and place on towel. 
9.14. Blot foot gently with towel to dry thoroughly particularly between toes. 
9.15. Empty the basin, refill with water and clean the other foot in same manner. 
9.16. Apply lotion /oil to feet. 
9.17. Trim/file toenails if needed. 
9.18. Notify the doctor for impaired peripheral circulation. 
9.19. Perform range of motion exercises to stimulate circulation and prevent foot 
contractors or muscle atrophy. 
9.20. Assist patient to position of comfort. 
9.21. Practice proper hand hygiene. 
9.22. Record procedure in nurse's records. 
9.23. Assess and record foot condition for, Edema, Infection and Impaired mobility. 
9.24. Ensure physician prescribe medicine if needed. 
10) TRAINING: All Nursing Personnel at MOH Hospital must be trained to the level 
stated in their Job Description provided by the Civil Services Bureau as per their 
designated position provided with the associated Organizational Chart. Nursing 
personnel will undergo additional training as changes in services or technology 
dictate. Specific training requirements will be documented in the specific work area 
policy. 
2
11) ACCESSIBILITY, 
DISSEMINATION, REVIEW, and REVISION & 
AUTHORIZATION: Please refer to sections 11, 12, 13 & 14 in 
MAP/MADM/03/0002: Ministry Administrative Policies (MAPs). 
3